---
template: chapter.pug
title: Performance
chaptertitle: 'What Is a CDN and How Does It Work?'
chapterauthor: Bruno Å kvorc
---

 
CDN - you keep seeing the acronym. Maybe in URLs, maybe on landing
pages, but it never quite clicked - what are Content Delivery Networks,
what do they **do** exactly?

We'll explain in this overview article, and demonstrate on two popular
ones in followup posts.

![Network](../images/1509315406network-1989146_640.png)

CDN Basics 
----------

A CDN is a network of computers that delivers content.

More specifically, it's a bunch of servers geographically positioned
between the origin server of some web content, and the user requesting
it, all with the purpose of delivering the content faster by reducing
latency. This is their *primary purpose*.

These geographically closer servers, also called PoPs or Points of
Presence, also cache the cacheable content which removes a lot of the
load from the origin server. There are different types of CDNs offering
different kinds of services, and they can have differing [*network
topology*](http://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~mz4615/): scattered CDNs aim to have
as many servers scattered around the world as possible. Akamai is one
such CDN. Consolidated CDNs have fewer points, but bigger ones built for
network performance, throughput, and DDoS resistance.


Types of CDNs 
-------------

We said that their primary purpose was to reduce latency and speed up
rendering. But in the modern world of 2MB images and 500kb JavaScript
libraries that take 3 minutes to boot up on websites, this latency
matters little. But there are other purposes to CDNs, too, which evolved
over time.

### Content-oriented CDNs 

Initially, CDNs were just for static content (JS, CSS, HTML). You had to
push content to them as you created/uploaded it (they didn't know they
needed to update their cache with your content, not even as someone
requested it).

Then, they added [origin
pulling](https://knowledgelayer.softlayer.com/faq/how-does-origin-pull-work),
making things more automatic - this meant that a user requested the
CDN's URL, and then the CDN requested the origin website's URL
automatically, caching what ever it got back. Additionally, availability
became an important factor. Many CDNs now cache a website's "last alive"
state so that if the origin goes down, the CDNed content is still
accessible to users, creating the illusion of stability until things
return to normal.

Additionally, modern CDNs often offer auto-optimization layers which
will automagically resize images and save them for future use based on
the image size requested. This means what if your site has a 2MB header
image and someone requests it on a 300px wide screen, the CDN will make
a copy that's 30kb in size and 300px wide and serve that in the future
to all mobile users, automatically making the site faster.

### Security-oriented CDNs 

The final layer of practicality added to CDNs was DDoS and bot
protection. CDNs like Incapsula specialize in this.

As the CDN is the outermost layer of a website's infrastructure and the
first recipient of traffic, it can detect DDoS attacks early and block
them with special DDoS protection servers called *scrubbers* without
them ever reaching the origin server and crashing it.

Additionally, by using knowledge crowdsourced from its many clients, a
CDN can *learn* about suspicious IPs, spammers, botters, even *types* of
crawlers and their behavior. For example, a scraper that works on site A
will, once identified, stop working on site B as well if that site is
protected by the same CDN, because the traffic filter will recognize a
pattern it's seen before.

![German Shepard
Guarding](../images/1509315571german-shepherd-166972_640.jpg)

What's more, while CDNs do allow their customers to upload custom
certificates, they also offer their own. This has two benefits:

1.  When a big vulnerability in the certificates appears, the CDNs
    usually quickly respond because they have the most to lose (all
    their customers). Hence, a fix is usually in place before most
    people even know about the security hole.
2.  Connections are faster because if many websites use the same CDN,
    then you've already established a valid connection and mutual trust
    with the CDN via its SSL certificate, and this process does not have
    to be repeated for every site that uses that CDN's certificate. This
    doesn't impact an individual website as much as it does *the entire
    web*.

Biggest Players 
---------------

Some of the biggest players in the CDN space are companies like Akamai,
AWS Cloudfront, Cloudinary, Incapsula, MaxCDN, Fastly, and others.

Rather than [compare them in
full](https://www.geckoandfly.com/10077/maxcdn-amazon-cloudfront-cloudflare-cachefly-and-edgecast-cdn-comparison/),
we'll list the categories in which each can be a champion:

### Scraping and DDoS Protection 

While fine in every other way too, Incapsula is unbeatable in scraping
and DDoS protection. With an extensive database of not only offending
proxy IP addresses but also mouse and browsing patterns of bots and
scrapers, Incapsula stops most automated attacks dead in their tracks.

**Choose if:** you're a web shop and don't want your competitors to
scrap your catalog

### Speed and Global Reach 

Akamai, the CDN that even Facebook uses, has a proven track record of
global availability. Their scattered model of network topology and
availability in even the poorer parts of the world (something other CDNs
lack) make content served with Akamai smooth to load even in
low-connectivity areas. A close second is AWS Cloudfront from Amazon.

**Choose if:** you're aiming for global reach, from China to US, from
Finland to Antarctica.

### Affordability

Amazon Cloudfront is the cheapest of the paid plans (we don't count free
plans as those often lack important features) and has the arguably
largest reach after Akamai, which isn't exactly cheap (a scattered
topology is expensive to maintain).

**Choose if:** price is an issue.

### Hotlinking

Hotlinking is when someone selects "Copy image address" on an image
hosted on your website, and includes it in their own directly, with the
original URL intact. This is usually sloppy and lazy work on the side of
content thieves, but can lead to big expenses if the copycat succeeds in
sharing their site on large-impact social media website like Facebook or
Reddit, and your server suffers for it. MaxCDN and KeyCDN both offer
very good hotlinking protection.

**Choose if:** you've got a gallery, travel blog, or any other
image-rich site which is at risk of hotlinking.

### Other

We encourage you to go out and investigate on your own. There are
countless posts comparing the CDNs one to the other, and each plan of
each CDN differs in offered options to the next one. It's extremely
difficult to cover them all, and the landscape constantly changes.

Implementation Process 
----------------------

Implementing a CDN typically entails changing some DNS records in the
control panel of the registrar (the company renting you your domain
name). This results in all traffic hitting the CDN first, which in turn
hits your website. Since it all happens behind the scenes (through IPs),
the process is transparent to the user.

![Front end vs back
end](../images/1509315728a1443ce742af309856b66e2d1777bd9d-coding-programming.jpg)

Sometimes, sites will add a special subdomain to their main domain on
which to host images, JavaScript, CSS, and other static content. If you
open the Network tab of a browser's dev console or just pay attention to
the status bar of your browser while a site like Facebook is loading,
you'll notice a lot of URLs with `cdn` in them - that's the site in
question requesting only *some* of its content from CDNs.

Why not request all content through CDNs? Because static content is
usually big - 2MB images, 500kb of JS, etc. This is worth serving
quickly, because a) it doesn't change often and can be cached for a long
time and b) removes a big, big load from the main server of the app,
which can be dynamic.

Conclusion
----------

In this article, you learned what a CDN was and how it works. You found
out about the different types of CDNs and their potential scope of work,
as well as the biggest players in the field.

In two followup articles we'll introduce Cloudinary and Cloudflare, and
in our major Performance-Month-Project we'll actually implement one of
them into our real world app so you can see it in action on a live
example. Stay tuned!
